---
title: Sphingolipids & Microvascular Function
image: /images/projects/sphingolipids-microvascular-function/image11.png
---

Vasodilation to shear stress (flow-induced dilation; FID), is an
endothelium-dependent process important for maintaining vascular homeostasis.
We have previously shown that risk factors for, or the presence of coronary
artery disease (CAD), evokes a transition in the endothelial mediator of FID
from nitric oxide (NO) to mitochondrial-derived hydrogen peroxide (H2O2).
Although both factors elicit smooth muscle relaxation, the non-vasomotor
effects of each are generally opposite with NO stimulating anti-inflammatory,
anti-thrombotic, and anti-proliferative pathways, compared to the
pro-inflammatory, pro-thrombotic, and pro-atherogenic nature of H2O2. Bioactive
lipids, known as sphingolipids, play an essential role in cardiovascular
pathophysiology. Ceramide, a prototypical sphingolipid product of
sphingomyelinase is produced in endothelial cells, found in human plasma, and
is a risk factor for atherosclerosis. Furthermore ceramide is known to
stimulate mitochondrial ROS production. The ability to decrease overall
ceramide levels through inhibition of NSmase or via activation of ceramidase,
can have a profound impact on multiple clinical scenarios that are attributable
to oxidative stress including vascular inflammation and thrombosis. Therefore
thorough understanding of ceramide signaling and regulatory mechanisms within
the vasculature may allow for the development of new therapeutics and a means
to improve microcirculation in disease.
